---
title: Peer Pressure Is The Sign Of Ownership
author: Ryan James Spencer
date: 2020-01-21T09:27:28.702008021+00:00
tags:
  - teams
  - leadership
summary: >-
  I'm nearing 6,000 contributions on GitHub. I mix personal and private
  contributions but I estimate a large portion of of the changes are from work.
  This is up from about 1,700 contributions back in 2018. Not all valuable
  contributions to a tech business are GitHub related; people write documentation,
  sketch out strategic plans for the business, spend time researching technical
  details, design user experiences, analyze user data for purposes of sales and
  marketing, and so on. All of these things don't wind up being issues,
  pull-requests, code review, or direct commits into a codebase and yet
  nonetheless help keep the company move forward.
---

I'm nearing 6,000 contributions on GitHub. I mix personal and private
contributions but I estimate a large portion of of the changes are from work.
This is up from about 1,700 contributions back in 2018. Not all valuable
contributions to a tech business are GitHub related; people write documentation,
sketch out strategic plans for the business, spend time researching technical
details, design user experiences, analyze user data for purposes of sales and
marketing, and so on. All of these things don't wind up being issues,
pull-requests, code review, or direct commits into a codebase and yet
nonetheless help keep the company move forward.

Nonetheless, a tech company has healthy codebase(s) when there is a fervor of
activity. Likewise, if your codebase(s) are highly active they may suffer a lot
of churn, where changes that are introduced are swiftly eased back out only to
be re-introduced again in rapid cycle. The true mark of health on codebase(s) is
a mark of steady progress despite the occasional setback. Sure, **stable systems
do exist** where activity is but the occasional patch but when something is
deemed stable can vary drastically depending on the complexity of the project
and the requirements that steer its growth.

Giving ownership away can be scary. What if we render control to members of the
team and all we get in return is a product running in circles? What if nothing
of value gets built and the product stagnates and rots?

Top down management makes sense in a factory setting; if you have a large room
full of people manually slaving away building widgets, you can treat them and
their process much like a chariot driver and its steeds; whip and hurl insults
at will and the workers will move faster. There is enough generality to
optimizing assembly lines that the illusion of optimizing _all_ forms of
business or systems are alike. _Wrong_. This management by microscope devolves
into micromanagement and creative output can't be managed in the same way. Jobs
that require a lot of thought in addition to output require a more hands-off
approach to achieve excellent results. Optimizing for output for creative output
means giving away the keys.

You can't create an illusion of ownership, either. Managers sometimes think they
can retain authority over decisions on a project while paying lip-service to
'owners'. This is a recipe for disaster when the truth is unveiled. Allowing
others to own systems (or projects) or subsections of systems (or projects)
allows them to thrive. Ownership leads one towards [home
making](https://www.justanotherdot.com/posts/make-a-home.html) where members
focus on the pursuit of an ideal lifestyle and surroundings.

A product rarely has a single project as a neighborhood rarely has a single
home. Imagine a partially isolated village with inhabits of various skills; for
the village to prosper everyone has to have a certain level of interdependence
for their survival and happiness.

And here's the rub, owners of projects put demands on other owners, without
expecting some central authority to put the demands on them instead. The sign of
ownership is peer pressure. Work gets queued up and prioritized in manageable
pools. All of our goals needed to be aligned to the business, sure, but it is up
to these owners to figure out how to best accomplish that goal within reason. A
central authority can still keep watch that things are on theme. People can
still move across a system and do changes where they need to with respect to
owners of the system the proposed changes are occurring. Ownership imbues a
sense of care on all parties. If no one owns anything, then everyone will do as
they please with little regard to 2nd or 3rd order consequences.

If you can't start fresh with respective owners at the get-go, try starting
small and handing out keys to smaller chunks of the larger system. You need
trust to make this work otherwise you'll wind up with a self-fulfilling
prophecy. The experiment will change you and your teams for the better.
