---
title: Pushing the Boulder
author: Ryan James Spencer
date: 2019-09-08T10:03:00Z
tags: [knowledge acquisition,  productivity]
---

I recently joked on twitter about speed reading:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Here’s how you speed
read: flip through a book and tell people you’ve read it.</p>&mdash; Ryan James
Spencer (@_justanotherdot) <a
href="https://twitter.com/_justanotherdot/status/1170118831219474433?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September
6, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I have an analogy for motivation and progress on projects. Imagine you have a
giant boulder in front of you. You know that in order to get what you want
you'll need to push it. You recognise that the inertia you'll need to overcome
at first is substantial, but, unfortunately, you think that pushing the boulder
will _always_ take the same amount of effort. The first step is always difficult
to get started on some project or hobby. If you can get the boulder moving,
keeping it in motion takes many small pushes. In other words, if you can make
the process of _doing_ and, especially, _tinkering_ as fast as you can, you'll
keep the boulder rolling, even if there is no destination.

The idea behind pushing a boulder is the same as [fast systems incurring
usage](https://jsomers.net/blog/speed-matters). **Action begets action**; Care
about improving your ability to do X? Dive into X. The quirk to this is that
when people try this they may eventually _do_ their respective action so
infrequently that they wind up facing the back of a still boulder.
The goal isn't to do a lot of work, it's to remove impediments that will slow
down your access to pushing the boulder.

Take acquiring knowledge. One way to acquire knowledge is to read. When you try
to acquire knowledge there is always a pool of unknown-unknowns whose size is,
itself, unknowable. There is also a pool of known-unknowns whose size is
determined by what we've managed to track. We are constantly acquiring things
from the unknown-unknown pool and refining them into known-unknowns. You come to
a subject and you're unsure about what you should learn so you figure out all
the things you should learn, then you start trying to fill in the details of
those things you are now aware of. That's the gist.

You need to do both things; figuring out the unknown-unknowns as well as the
known-unknowns. Some say this is similar to panning for gold. I think that's a
terrible analogy because panning for gold is _so slow_. No modern mining outfit
would pan for gold these days. They would use large machines that could tear
through materials and sift, sort, and detect, quickly. It also doesn't help that
unknown-unknowns of value are easily detectable in the same way you may be
looking for a precious metal or stone.

I learned this multiple pass technique when I first got into [research
papers](https://www.elsevier.com/connect/infographic-how-to-read-a-scientific-paper).
It's kind of the same thing that speed readers recommend for comprehension and
is the basic idea behind [How to Read a
Book](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/567610.How_to_Read_a_Book). You read
the abstract/introduction, the conclusion, and then you skim your way through,
noticing headlines, captions, diagrams, and all the other 'top-level' items.
When that is done, you can go in for another pass that's a bit more indepth,
reading the sections you care about. You can summarize (great for retrieval
practice).

Not all material is to be read the same way. There are some books I love reading
cover to cover, but my problem is that I have consistently oriented myself
around doing that process as the default. **Don't pan for gold, mine for it with
machines.** Instead, try to make the process quick. The multipass approach works
because you are focusing on getting in there to hone away at the
unknown-unknowns first and then maybe moving in for the parts of the
known-unknowns you are unsure about. This process actually makes services like
Safari and Kindle Unlimited much more valuable because you are less precious
about the books you choose to read and go through.

Take a book you want to get through. Try to just flip through it. It doesn't
matter what the book is. Once you're done skimming, try to concentrate on the
primary points you've just become aware of. Maybe you knew about some of this
before hand. In your subsequent passes, try to hone in on the things you care
about more. The interesting things, etc. Reading books out of order is actually
fine for a lot of material if the first pass didn't tell you enough of what you
need to know.

This first-pass gate is great because there is a huge amount of material that
can be summarised in short summaries. A good book review, summary blog post or
video, is worth it's weight in gold because it means I largely don't have to
consume the material myself. This is fraught with one problem; what one person
may have interpreted may not be the same as me, but summaries of this kind are
useful because they enable people to determine if they want to explore deeper
into a matter.

The act of pushing the boulder isn't one giant rigged up effort. It's lots of
small pushes to get it going, and with time the total effort decreases.

Many actions intended for 'completion' are fraught with the peril of diminishing
returns. Reading a book from cover to cover may give you some deeper insight,
but with a multipass approach. There is also a fear that if someone doesn't read
a book from cover to cover, they may be missing out. Multipass approach has this
covered because you are scouring the material, in greater scrutiny, several
times. If you missed said detail after 2-3+ readings, it is highly likely it
isn't worth scouring again.

Set timers. Do things to put you in the uncomfortable state of pushing through
material. Think like a giant machine ripping through material. There is an
insane amount of dead weight in what people produce. This is why it's always
healthy to close browser tabs, go from a clean slate when you're blocked, etc.
etc.
