site/posts/safely-shape-code-with-curtains.md, before:

---
title: Safely Shape Code With Curtains
author: Ryan James Spencer
date: 2019-10-19T11:29:55.346897423+00:00
tags: [principle, pattern, systems topology, systems design]
---

Once upon a time I studied photography at an art school. It was there that I
learned the importance of separation between tones in an image. If the
separation, tone or color, between objects in my images wasn't quite right I'd
have to redo all my work in order to get a grade. [Separation is how we often
define our mental maps of the
world.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gestalt_psychology) For this article, I'll
call anything that is distinct from other things an "entity".

Entities have edges. They may have eddies of communication or arrows of
connection through these edges. Edges may be incidental, e.g. defined by people
you don't know or from natural consequences, or they may be intentional, i.e.
the result of deliberate planning and execution. Entities have non-zero surface
area, otherwise they wouldn't exist, but that doesn't mean they cannot be
relatively invisible.

Clarifying (edges) means simpler mental maps. Simpler mental maps means easier
to reason about systems and programs. Simpler systems and programs means
increased velocity for progress and experimentation. Each of these examples
could be their own posts, but for now it suffices to say that examples of this
type of organization (clarification) are,

1. Serialization to the wire (network), disk, and internal datatype definitions
   _individually_ go into their respective modules

2. Core logic that performs calculations versus reading from disk, e.g.
   application level versus storage engine logic, are separated

3. Munging layers, or what some call an adapter, that transform data to the
   shape you so desire are not tied into (1). This is bidirectional; it's
   equally fair to have the adapting layer work on outbound and inbound
   interfaces.

Most of this might feel a bit obvious: things have edges and that's how
we tell they are distinct, but how does this relate to coding?

It's common to think that programming _has_ to be a balancing act between
progress (by accepting breakage) and stability (by leaving things alone). I've
talked a bit before about [how vital constant experimentation
is](https://www.justanotherdot.com/posts/may-you-be-the-author-of-two-to-the-n-programs.html),
but this balancing act is not the _only_ way to go about things. Yes, things
break when they have production data running through their digital veins and
having instrumentation to gain visibility into your running code in production
is crucial to combat this statistic of failure, but let's consider another
approach to the development side of correctness.

Although it may seem strange for me to use the term _artificial_ when all the
boundaries discussed here seem planned by ourselves or by others, I use the term
"curtain" here to denote _artificial_ delineations we establish to avoid working
in _slices_. A sliced approach to development means we attempt to get all
working functionality, from front to back, one slice at a time. In the following
diagram the red boxes are slices of features whereas non-sliced functionality is
stable:

<figure>
  <img
    src="/assets/images/sliced-development-example.png"
    alt="a diagram depicting 'sliced' development"
    title="An example of 'sliced' development">
  </img>
</figure>

We can define "curtains" (again: artificial edges for the purposes of
development) to retain stability in all areas "exterior" to the curtain.
"Exterior" may very well be "interior" code! Setting up curtains can be done
with [feature-flags, parallel
implementations](https://www.justanotherdot.com/posts/move-fast-and-tuck-code-into-the-shadows.html)
or even creating new surfaces where interaction will be performed and migrating
after the fact when everything seems settled. As long as the "exterior" to the
curtain go on its life as if nothing is wrong, a curtain serves its purpose. Per
the example above it might look like this:

<figure>
  <img
    src="/assets/images/curtained-development-example.png"
    alt="a diagram depicting 'curtained' development"
    title="An example of 'curtained' development"
  </img>
</figure>

In this diagram, you could be setting up the curtain to keep the core of the
application stable or the client and interfaces the client talks to stable. A
curtain based approach by no means requires having a layered architecture or
thinking in that manner. The fact that a curtain is malleable and artificial
means we can define its boundaries, but a curtain becomes a slice when it
overlaps too many real edges in a system. Why is this any better than a sliced
approach?

**Curtains buy you breathing room.**

There is always an implicit countdown when you keep things stable but don't make
progress. "Where is the business value they are adding?" squawks the manager. If
you are making a lot of progress but breaking things the countdown timer is time
to completion but in the face of churn, top-down pressure, peer-pressure, and so
on. **Breathing room gives you space to think. Space to think means you can buy
yourself breathing room. This helps build healthy systems with reduced
complexity and healthy systems means higher rates of progress and
experimentation.**

Commit message:

Plug in summaries and images

site/posts/safely-shape-code-with-curtains.md, after:

---
title: Safely Shape Code With Curtains
author: Ryan James Spencer
date: 2019-10-19T11:29:55.346897423+00:00
tags: [principle, pattern, systems topology, systems design]
image: safely-shape-code-with-curtains.jpg
summary: >-
  Once upon a time I studied photography at an art school. It was there that I
  learned the importance of separation between tones in an image. If the
  separation, tone or color, between objects in my images wasn't quite right I'd
  have to redo all my work in order to get a grade. Separation is how we often
  define our mental maps of the world. For this article, I'll call anything that
  is distinct from other things an "entity".
hero_font_color: light
---

Once upon a time I studied photography at an art school. It was there that I
learned the importance of separation between tones in an image. If the
separation, tone or color, between objects in my images wasn't quite right I'd
have to redo all my work in order to get a grade. [Separation is how we often
define our mental maps of the
world.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gestalt_psychology) For this article, I'll
call anything that is distinct from other things an "entity".

Entities have edges. They may have eddies of communication or arrows of
connection through these edges. Edges may be incidental, e.g. defined by people
you don't know or from natural consequences, or they may be intentional, i.e.
the result of deliberate planning and execution. Entities have non-zero surface
area, otherwise they wouldn't exist, but that doesn't mean they cannot be
relatively invisible.

Clarifying (edges) means simpler mental maps. Simpler mental maps means easier
to reason about systems and programs. Simpler systems and programs means
increased velocity for progress and experimentation. Each of these examples
could be their own posts, but for now it suffices to say that examples of this
type of organization (clarification) are,

1. Serialization to the wire (network), disk, and internal datatype definitions
   _individually_ go into their respective modules

2. Core logic that performs calculations versus reading from disk, e.g.
   application level versus storage engine logic, are separated

3. Munging layers, or what some call an adapter, that transform data to the
   shape you so desire are not tied into (1). This is bidirectional; it's
   equally fair to have the adapting layer work on outbound and inbound
   interfaces.

Most of this might feel a bit obvious: things have edges and that's how
we tell they are distinct, but how does this relate to coding?

It's common to think that programming _has_ to be a balancing act between
progress (by accepting breakage) and stability (by leaving things alone). I've
talked a bit before about [how vital constant experimentation
is](https://www.justanotherdot.com/posts/may-you-be-the-author-of-two-to-the-n-programs.html),
but this balancing act is not the _only_ way to go about things. Yes, things
break when they have production data running through their digital veins and
having instrumentation to gain visibility into your running code in production
is crucial to combat this statistic of failure, but let's consider another
approach to the development side of correctness.

Although it may seem strange for me to use the term _artificial_ when all the
boundaries discussed here seem planned by ourselves or by others, I use the term
"curtain" here to denote _artificial_ delineations we establish to avoid working
in _slices_. A sliced approach to development means we attempt to get all
working functionality, from front to back, one slice at a time. In the following
diagram the red boxes are slices of features whereas non-sliced functionality is
stable:

<figure>
  <img
    src="/assets/images/sliced-development-example.png"
    alt="a diagram depicting 'sliced' development"
    title="An example of 'sliced' development">
  </img>
</figure>

We can define "curtains" (again: artificial edges for the purposes of
development) to retain stability in all areas "exterior" to the curtain.
"Exterior" may very well be "interior" code! Setting up curtains can be done
with [feature-flags, parallel
implementations](https://www.justanotherdot.com/posts/move-fast-and-tuck-code-into-the-shadows.html)
or even creating new surfaces where interaction will be performed and migrating
after the fact when everything seems settled. As long as the "exterior" to the
curtain go on its life as if nothing is wrong, a curtain serves its purpose. Per
the example above it might look like this:

<figure>
  <img
    src="/assets/images/curtained-development-example.png"
    alt="a diagram depicting 'curtained' development"
    title="An example of 'curtained' development"
  </img>
</figure>

In this diagram, you could be setting up the curtain to keep the core of the
application stable or the client and interfaces the client talks to stable. A
curtain based approach by no means requires having a layered architecture or
thinking in that manner. The fact that a curtain is malleable and artificial
means we can define its boundaries, but a curtain becomes a slice when it
overlaps too many real edges in a system. Why is this any better than a sliced
approach?

**Curtains buy you breathing room.**

There is always an implicit countdown when you keep things stable but don't make
progress. "Where is the business value they are adding?" squawks the manager. If
you are making a lot of progress but breaking things the countdown timer is time
to completion but in the face of churn, top-down pressure, peer-pressure, and so
on. **Breathing room gives you space to think. Space to think means you can buy
yourself breathing room. This helps build healthy systems with reduced
complexity and healthy systems means higher rates of progress and
experimentation.**
