---
title: Simulate
author: Ryan James Spencer
date: 2023-06-06T12:29:55.613200337+00:00
tags:
  -
summary: >-
---
 
Software (professionally) involves a lot of theorizing; doing X and Y will roll
up to a feature we expect users to love and, thus, will want to pay us gobs of
money to use to alleviate their pains and/or make them feel like a superstar. 

Sometimes the theorizing feels airy, and we try to tether it to real customers,
real (anonymized) user stories, real data of some kind. 

There’s another way we, at work, started trying that I quite like; run
simulations (i also call these “drills”). A simulation is a bit like dogfooding
but it is executing the full funnel from start and finish yourself, whether or
not parts are manual or automatic. It sharpens the narrative and is highly
guided. I read Build by Tony Fadel last year and loved it, in particular with
the mantas of making things tangible and being crystal clear about the narrative
for a customer (what others may call “the customer journey”) without excluding
parts such as product awareness or pre-sales,  all the way to being furious with
the product and wanting to ring up to demand a refund or throw the damn thing
out a window. 

The _whole_ story means we get a holistic picture, whereby we identify failures
on our (product development) end, as well as opportunities for improvement, and
we better get into the shoes of the user, rather than it being hypothetical. 

Does every product fit this simulation shoe? Maybe not. I am hopeful it does,
because it makes so much work realistic, tied to real outcomes that impact this
journey, and improving a *shared* understanding of empathy of what the user is
feeling. 

On the note of tangibility, you can’t go on this journey as a thought
experiment, but you need to fill in the gaps to make it something that involves
actual interactions. Running simulations exposes what is and isn’t tangible, and
what parts of the interfaces need to be shored up. 

A cadence of simulation to development might make sense, too, where the
development works on identified tasks from the simulation, and the process
repeats for the next iteration of essentials or improvements.

The one part I am unsure of is whether this is a long term process, or if it’s
only needed *now* while we are continuing to build up product market fit. But
alas, simulations are cool, and maybe you can give them a try, too, and let me
know what worked or didn’t. 
