---
title: Soft Skill Hygiene
author: Ryan James Spencer
date: 2020-01-07T08:57:10.002376326+00:00
tags: [soft skills]
summary: >-
  Eyes glaze over at the words "soft skills" for developers of both the "ship it"
  and technical purists camp. Unfortunately, humans aren't emotionally empty
  robots and team work is generally required to build anything of sufficient
  complexity. Trust helps build innovative and productive teams. Trust is built up
  from cultivating safety and vulnerability and we can achieve these
  characteristics through effective communication.
---

Eyes glaze over at the words "soft skills" for developers of both the "ship it"
and technical purists camp. Unfortunately, humans aren't emotionally empty
robots and team work is generally required to build anything of sufficient
complexity. Trust helps build innovative and productive teams. [Trust is built
up from cultivating safety and vulnerability](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/33517721-the-culture-code)
and we can achieve these characteristics through effective communication.

Listening comes first. People trust when they feel heard. Listening takes
patience and being patience is a skill that takes effort to improve. When we
listen, we can bubble with questions, agreements, and disagreements.
Disagreements may cause us to stop listening. Especially disruptive are
disagreements about expressed emotions. This is when respect comes into the
picture.

**Respectful listening means emotional validation.** Although you may not think
that the other party's emotions are real that does not change the fact that the
other party feels them. It is disrespectful to hold the stance that you know a
person's feelings better than themselves. Validating someone else's emotions
means you trust the other party. A lack of trust tends to form from the worry
that other people are manipulating us. To properly validate other people's
emotions we need to take the leap of faith that the other party is being honest
with us. People look at others who share as having great depths of courage to
draw from, but it is the act of sharing that creates courage. It's the same with
trust; in order to trust others we also need to foster trust. I won't deny that
there are situations where someone may be manipulative and if you find you are
surrounded by this type of behaviour, get out! Signs of manipulation tend to be
oversharing of information (the subtle approach) or out-shouting peers (the less
subtle approach).

A conversation has two directions. We can weaken our discourse by being
aggressive or not even participating at all. When we don't participate that's
known as submissive or passive communication. Both passive and aggressive
communication can erode relationships. Refraining from sharing information does
not encourage others to share. Aggressively attacking shared information creates
cold speech. People fall into the aggressive mode of communication by likening
it to boldness and assuming that effective communication is _bold_
communication. Those with aggressive communication then cause others to refrain
from sharing.

Assertive communication is middle ground. Instead of chipping away at a
collective sense of safety and willingness to share, it helps strengthen
relationships. From a time management perspective it may make sense to say "no"
to as many things as possible; your time is a precious resource and wasting it
with needless tasks is a waste. But we don't always have to frame a "no" with
the word "no". One variation of this technique I've found incredibly helpful is
the "yes and ..." approach. When you say "yes but ..." you inadvertently invite
debate, but when you say "yes and ..." you _validate_ the other person's option
and provide your thoughts in addition.

Assertive communication is also respectful. As such, avoid using accusatory
language. Often when we feel something there is a tendency to state an
accusation rather than a reflection of how we feel, such as "I feel nervous
about this option" as opposed to "you are always trying picking lousy options".
Note, also, the use of the word "always". Using exaggerated language tends to
intensify debate. How do you tell someone they need to switch gears after a lot
of wasted effort on irrelevant details? Reminding someone of the facts will have
a far greater impact that the ensuing isolation created from making a judgement
on the person's ability to act.

Also, speaking with intent tends to encourage healthy discussion without
stopping healthy activity. This is one of the most empowering things I can
recommend. Stating "I intend to ..." allows others to raise any concerns but
also makes it clear that this is something you truly are going to do unless
there are serious complications with it. Paradoxically, asking for permission
tends to foster a lack of action _and_ discussion.

Lastly, things that may seem useless but have big impact are making eye contact
(you can even possibly get away with [looking in the general
area](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/02/190205102532.htm)),
[posture](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25066556-presence?from_search=true&qid=wpWrhGt3hv&rank=6),
and
[smiling](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00224545.1982.9713408).
And that's it, really. Validate, share, be intentional, don't be an asshole even
if you're technically right, and you will go far in developing trusting and
cohesive teams than if you plugged your ears and pretend everything comes down
to luck.
